Add support for the WebAssembly tail calls proposal in Wasmtime (#29)
bytecodealliance/rfcs: accepted/tail-calls.md

clean up stack space for callers, regardless whether we are in a tail call or
not. This is required because we need to clean up the stack arguments after
exiting a function, and we no longer always exit a function by returning to the
caller, we can also exit the function by tail calling to another function. In
that new case, we can't delay cleaning up stack arguments until the last
function in a tail call chain returns to the original caller. If every function
in the tail call chain allocated stack arguments, this would lead to *O(n)*
stack growth in the tail call chain, but we *must* maintain *O(1)* stack space
for the whole chain. So callees must be responsible for cleaning up their own
stack arguments.

[^per-architecture]: Yes, one calling convention per-architecture not one
    per-target. Currently Wasm compiled for x86-64 has a different calling
    convention depending on if we are targeting Windows or Unix. That was
    motivated by having the Wasm calling convention interoperable with the
    host's native calling convention. Given that we have to support tail calls,
    we can't have that interoperability anymore, so we can also switch to a

>     single calling convention on x86-64. Yay, fewer variants to mantain!

Reviewer: They can have the same name on all architectures, right? Also isn't it still necessary to have a windows and non-windows version to account for any different redzone sizes (0 on x86_64 windows, 128 bytes I believe on x86_64 Unix) and unwinder impls? Those are part of the platform abi you aren't allowed to violate. Using a too big redzone will cause interrupts to mess with the stack and using the wrong unwinder impl breaks backtraces.

```

### `array → native`

The caller is a `wasmtime::Func::call` invocation and the callee is a
`wasmtime::Func::wrap` host function. This doesn't cross into Wasm, so it
doesn't need to save registers, but we do need a trampoline to convert between
the different calling conventions. The host caller gets the callee function
pointer from the `VMCallerCheckedAnyfunc::array_call` field, which is the
trampoline's function pointer.

This trampoline will be a monomorphized Rust function defined inside the
`macro_rules!` that defines our `IntoFunc` implementations. Note that it cannot
be in any compiled Wasm object because there is no guarantee that there is any
Wasm loaded in the system (let alone with the right function signature).

This call path used to involve two trampolines, but now has only one!

```
+------+                 +------------+                  +------+
|      |---array-call--->|            |---native-call--->|      |
| Host |                 | Trampoline |                  | Host |
|      |<--array-return--|            |<--native-return--|      |
+------+                 +------------+                  +------+
```

### `array → array`

> The caller is a `wasmtime::Func::call` invocation adn teh callee is a

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The caller is a `wasmtime::Func::call` invocation and the callee is a
```

Author: Thanks!

  paths depending on whether it is Wasm that needs a trampoline or is a
  host-to-host call that doesn't need trampolines. This adds complexity and
  overhead to our call paths. We want these to be as maintainable as possible
  and definitely as fast as possible.

* Add Cranelift as a build dependency for Wasmtime and pre-compile a trampoline
  for each of our `IntoFunc` signatures so we always have trampolines available
  for host functions. In addition to complicating the build process, this bloats
  the binary with a bunch of trampolines that are probably never used, which
  makes it harder to use Wasmtime in resource constrained environments.

* Use the type system to differentiate between `wasmtime::HostFunc` and
  `wasmtime::WasmFunc` and then statically disallow calls that would need some
  sort of trampoline that we wouldn't have access to. This is a large, clunky
  change to Wasmtime's API for very little benefit, especially since we have
  viable alternatives.

As far as the new Wasm calling convention goes, there are some alternative
approaches that we could explore as well:

* We could bend over backwards to maintain interoperability with existing

>   calling conventions (to a degree) the way that [SpiderMonkey plans on

Reviewer 3: Our plans are still in flux here, we're currently prototyping out some other approaches other than what Lars prototyped in that document.

For extra context too, our primary complexity here is that our ABI has some global state (pinned registers and some JS::Activation state) that must be kept in sync with our current module instance. Upon calls that might cross module instances (imports/indirect/call_ref), the caller performs a context switch before and after the call to maintain this global state. We don't do this work on direct calls, as we statically whether it will be cross-instance. This biases us in favor of direct calls, as they're assumed to be the critical path.

With tail calls however, we can replace a same-instance callee with a cross-instance callee and when that cross-instance callee returns we need to do a context-switch, but the direct caller is not set up to do that.

Lars' scheme adds an extra frame on the first tail call to prevent this from happening. This has the noted complexity, so we're evaluating some other options too.

Author: Good to know, thanks @eqrion. Interested to hear where y'all end up in the design space.

* We could leave stack arguments before the return address and saved frame
  pointer, and still have callees clean up the stack arguments. The previous
  alternative design sort of implies this behavior, but it is worth exploring on
  its own as well. The main problem here is that eventually the callee epilogue
  is trying to clean up those stack arguments, but can't just pop them because
  the return address is on top of them:

  ```
  [ ...caller-frame... | ...stack-args... | RA ]
  ```

  In general, this can be solved by copying the return address around, but this
  has questionable interactions with hardware control-flow integrity features as
  well as pessimizing speculation. Epilogues could also start to get lengthy, in
  terms of how many instructions they contain, rather than remaining short,
  tight sequences. x86 does actually have a form of `ret` where you can pass an
  immediate that says how many additional bytes to pop from the stack after
  popping the return address, and so it could avoid this particular downside,
  but not all architectures have an equivalent. And why try to solve this
  incidental problem when we have a viable alternative that side steps it

>   completely?

Reviewer 4: This layout is actually better than the one proposed in this RFC because it avoids the issue at the call site where data is written below the stack pointer. Even though wasmtime itself uses an alternate signal stack, the embedder could also have set up another signal handler without `SA_ONSTACK` which would not use the alternate signal stack.

No copying of the return address is actually necessary since x86 is the only architecture which combines a pop of the return address in the same instruction as the return itself. Other architectures use a return address register which can be popped first, after which the stack arguments can be freed before actually returning.

  yet, but we will want to eventually. Is the proposed calling convention
  compatible? I don't see any reason why not! But not 100% sure. Again, I just
  want to call this out to get a few more people thinking about it and double
  checking.

* Should we repurpose the `wasmtime_*` calling convention variants into the new
  Wasm calling conventions, or should we create wholly new calling conventions?
  I'm leaning towards the latter so we have less existing stuff to disentangle
  and tests to modify and keep passing as we are in the just-start-building-it
  phases. But maybe others feel differently?

* What is the interaction with Windows' SEH and the assumptions that Windows
  makes about user-space programs? Is this going to break unwinding from system
  calls on Windows? I think it can, but also I don't see a way that we can avoid
  breaking that, even if we did what SpiderMonkey is doing to provide some
  limited interoperability with the native calling conventions, when there is a
  tail call chain on the stack and the OS is trying to unwind the user-space
  program. I think this is unavoidable.

* Can we reuse, or fork, code from `regalloc2` to do parallel copies between

>   stack arguments?

Reviewer 2: an alternative idea to diy-ing parallel copies would be to generate a fake entry block so regalloc2 register allocates for all alternative entry points (trampolines fused to the function) simultaneously. this would allow regalloc2 to potentially make better register allocations, since it register allocates for all the prologues/trampolines simultaneously

something like (can be adapted to other calling conventions as necessary):
```
fake-entry: # entry block for reg-alloc
    fake-jump entry-wasm, #[cold] entry-native, #[cold] entry-array # idk if branch hints are supported
entry-wasm: # label used as function ptr for wasm calls
    push fp
    fp = sp
    alloc-stack
    args = input-regs-and-stack-slots
    jump entry(args)
entry-native: # label used as function ptr for native calls
    push-native-return-trampoline-address  # makes return insn return into trampoline for cleanup
    push fp
    fp = sp
    alloc-stack
    args = input-regs-and-stack-slots
    save-fp-sp-etc
    jump entry(args)
entry-array:
    push-array-return-trampoline-address  # makes return insn return into trampoline for cleanup
    push fp
    fp = sp
    alloc-stack
    args = load-from-array
    save-fp-sp-etc
    jump entry(args)
entry(args):
    ...normal-wasm-body...
return:
    sp = fp
    pop fp
    ret
```

push-*-trampoline-address could be compiled to:
x86_64
```
    call rest-of-entry # prime branch predictor
return-trampoline:
    cleanup...
    ret
```
everything else:
```
    save lr
    lr = call rest-of-entry # prime branch predictor
return-trampoline:
    cleanup...
    ret lr
```

Reviewer: I have been thinking about something like this in the past too even before this rfc. Exception support requires multiple exit points which are observably different. It isn't much of a stretch to extend this to multiple entry points for a function as well even if the implementation may be different.

Reviewer 2: i added the fake entry block because most dominator tree calculations require a root, so regalloc2 likely also requires that

Reviewer 4: I've used regalloc2 with multiple entry points in my own code. The design I used is based on [EntrySwitch](https://webkit.org/docs/b3/intermediate-representation.html) from Webkit's B3 compiler:

> B3 supports multiple procedure entrypoints. The way you create multiple entrypoints is by placing an EntrySwitch at the end of the root block. The root block must then have a successor for each entrypoint. Additionally, you must tell the Procedure how many entrypoints you want.
>
> [...]
>
> EntrySwitch behaves as if each Procedure has a variable called Entry. Each physical entrypoint sets Entry to the index of that entrypoint (so 0, 1, or 2, above) and jumps to the root block. EntrySwitch is just a switch on the Entry variable. Transformations over code that uses EntrySwitch are valid so long as they don't change the procedure's behavior under these semantics.
>
> EntrySwitch is implemented without any actual variables or switching. Instead, all code that lies on some path from the root block to some EntrySwitch is cloned for each entrypoint. This lowering is done as a very late phase in Air, so most of the compiler does not have to know anything about entrypoints. Most of the compiler treats EntrySwitch as an opaque control flow construct. EntrySwitch lowering is allowed to clone an arbitrary amount of code. However, normal uses of EntrySwitch will place it at the end of an empty root block and B3 will only hoist a handful of things above EntrySwitch. This leads to only a small amount of cloned code in practice.

    // [ ...caller-frame... | ...new-stack-args... | RA | FP' | ...garbage... ]

    // Deallocate the current stack frame's garbage stack slots.
    SP = FP;

    //                                                  SP/FP
    //                                                    |
    //                                                    V
    // [ ...caller-frame... | ...new-stack-args... | RA | FP' ]

    // Restore the previous frame's FP.
    FP = pop;

    //   FP                                          SP
    //   |                                           |
    //   V                                           V
    // [ ...caller-frame... | ...new-stack-args... | RA ]

    // Transfer control to the callee. Do not use a call that pushes a return
    // address, that is already filled in. Just use a plain unconditional jump.
    jump $callee;
}
```

Under this scheme, regular call paths should be exactly as performant as they
are today. Tail calls will be as well, if they do not use stack arguments, or
the tail caller and tail callee use the same number of stack arguments. Tail
calls where there are different numbers of stack arguments will be penalized,

> however. Potentially fairly egregiously, since copying return addresses around

Reviewer 2: from what I know, most call stack branch predictors don't care if you copy the return address around, all they care is that the return branches to where they expect. This is particularly true on ISAs where the return address is stored in the Link Register (nearly every common ISA except x86-32/64), since compilers commonly move that around and move it back when returning.

Reviewer 5: Indeed, in the CPU frontend the machine just sees `call` and `ret` at various RIPs, and doesn't know RSP yet; call pushes on the predictor's internal stack and ret pops (slight simplification wrt misspeculation cleanup but...); the load from the actual in-memory stack will happen in the backend and be verified against the popped (predicted) value but in principle could have been loaded from anywhere.

Author: Will remove this concern as well.

  Wasm calling conventions, or should we create wholly new calling conventions?
  I'm leaning towards the latter so we have less existing stuff to disentangle
  and tests to modify and keep passing as we are in the just-start-building-it
  phases. But maybe others feel differently?

* What is the interaction with Windows' SEH and the assumptions that Windows
  makes about user-space programs? Is this going to break unwinding from system
  calls on Windows? I think it can, but also I don't see a way that we can avoid
  breaking that, even if we did what SpiderMonkey is doing to provide some
  limited interoperability with the native calling conventions, when there is a
  tail call chain on the stack and the OS is trying to unwind the user-space
  program. I think this is unavoidable.

* Can we reuse, or fork, code from `regalloc2` to do parallel copies between
  stack arguments?

* Is copying the return address between stack slots on tail calls (where we have
  different numbers of stack arguments) incompatible with hardware control-flow
  integrity features? I don't believe it conflicts with ARM's pointer

>   authentication scheme, but I'm less sure about Intel CET and its shadow stack.

Reviewer 2: afaict from reading https://www.felixcloutier.com/x86/ret.html Intel CET doesn't care which RSP it reads from, all it cares about is if the loaded value matches the value from the shadow stack.

Reviewer 5: Yup, and this should be the case given that we implement the tail call itself with a jmp rather than call -- the only `call` the machine sees is the original call, and the return address will match that call. (In other words a call/tail_call/tail_call/.../ret sequence is a push-shadow/nop/nop/.../pop-shadow sequence on the shadow stack, so everything is still properly nested.)

Author: Great, I'll remove this concern.
